Added the Support for RAC on PODMAN (#2424)
oracle/docker-images: OracleDatabase/RAC/OracleRealApplicationClusters/DOCKER_README.md

> # ORACLE RAC Database on DOCKER

Author: Added the fix.

> This project offers sample container files for Oracle Grid Infrastructure and Oracle Real Application Clusters:

Author: Added the fix.

You must provide block devices shared across the hosts.  If you don't have shared block storage, you can use an NFS volume.

Refer Oracle Database 21c Release documentation [Oracle Grid Infrastructure Installation and Upgrade Guide](https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/21/cwlin/index.html) and allocate the following resource as per the Oracle documentation.

1. You must configure the following addresses manually in your DNS.
   * Public IP address for each container
   * Private IP address for each container
   * Virtual IP address for each container
   * Three single client access name (SCAN) addresses for the cluster.
2. If you are planning to use block devices for shared storage, allocate block devices for Oracle Cluster Registry (OCR)/voting and database files.
3. If you are planning to use NFS storage for OCR/Voting and database files, configure NFS storage and export at least one NFS mount. For testing purposes only, use the Oracle rac-storage-server image to deploy a docker container providing NFS-based sharable storage. This applies also to domain name server (DNS) server.

> 4. If you are planning to use DNSServer container for SCAN, IPs, VIPs resolution, configure DNSServer. For testing purposes only, use the Oracle rac-dns-server image to deploy a docker container providing DNS resolutions.

Author: It is DNSServer. I will fix it.

10. To resolve VIPs and SCAN IPs, we are using a dummy DNS container in this guide. Before proceeding to the next step, create a [DNS server container](../OracleDNSServer/README.md). If you have a pre-configured DNS server in your environment, you can replace `-e DNS_SERVERS=172.16.1.25`, `--dns=172.16.1.25`, `-e DOMAIN=example.com`  and `--dns-search=example.com` parameters in **Section 2: Building Oracle RAC Database Docker Install Images** with the `DOMAIN_NAME' and 'DNS_SERVER' based on your environment.
 
11. The Oracle RAC dockerfiles, do not contain any Oracle Software Binaries. Download the following software from the [Oracle Technology Network](https://www.oracle.com/technetwork/database/enterprise-edition/downloads/index.html) and stage them under `<GITHUM_REPO_CLONED_PATH>/docker-images/OracleDatabase/RAC/OracleRACStorageServer/dockerfiles` folder.

    Oracle Database 21c Grid Infrastructure (21.3) for Linux x86-64
    Oracle Database 21c (21.3) for Linux x86-64

### Notes

> * If the docker bridge network is not available outside your host, you can use the Oracle Connection Manager (CMAN) image to access the Oracle RAC Database from outside the host.

Author: Added the fix.

* To understand the Oracle RAC on Docker setup in detail, you can refer [Best Practices for Deploying Oracle RAC on Docker](https://www.oracle.com/technetwork/database/options/clustering/rac-ondocker-bp-wp-5458685.pdf) white paper published on OTN.

## Section 2: Building Oracle RAC Database Container Images

**IMPORTANT :** This section assumes that you have gone through all the pre-requisites in Section 1 and executed all the steps based on your environment. Do not uncompress the binaries and patches.

> To assist in building the images, you can use the [buildContainerImage.sh](https://github.com/oracle/docker-images/blob/master/OracleDatabase/RAC/OracleRealApplicationClusters/dockerfiles/buildContainerImage.sh) script. See the following for instructions and usage.

Author: Added the fix.

  ```
  ./buildContainerImage.sh -v <Software Version>
  #  e.g., ./buildContainerImage.sh -v 21.3.0

>   ```

Author: Added the fix.

For detailed usage of the command, execute the following command:

>   ```

Author: Added the fix.

  #  ./buildContainerImage.sh -h
  ```

### Notes

* The resulting images will contain the Oracle Grid Infrastructure Binaries and Oracle RAC Database binaries.

> * If you are behind a proxy, you need to set the http_proxy or https_proxy environment variable based on your environment before building the image.

Author: Added the fix.

## Section 3: Creating the Oracle GI and RAC Container

> All containers will share a host file for name resolution.  The shared hostfile must be available to all containers. Create the shared host file (if it doesn't exist) at `/opt/containers/rac_host_file`:

Author: Added the fix.

For example:

>   ```

Author: Added the fix.

  # mkdir /opt/containers
  # touch /opt/containers/rac_host_file
  ```

> **Note:** Do not modify `/opt/containers/rac_host_file` from docker host. It will be managed from within the containers.

Author: Added the fix.

If you are using the Oracle Connection Manager for accessing the Oracle RAC Database from outside the host, you need to add the following variable in the container creation command.

>   ```

Author: Added the fix.

  -e CMAN_HOSTNAME=(CMAN_HOSTNAME) -e CMAN_IP=(CMAN_IP)
  ```

**Note:** You need to replace `CMAN_HOSTNAME` and `CMAN_IP` with the correct values based on your environment settings.

### Password management

Specify the secret volume for resetting grid/oracle and database password during node creation or node addition. It can be shared volume among all the containers

>   ```

Author: Added the fix.

  mkdir /opt/.secrets/
  openssl rand -hex 64 -out /opt/.secrets/pwd.key
  ```

Edit the `/opt/.secrets/common_os_pwdfile` and seed the password for grid/oracle and database. It will be a common password for grid/oracle and database users. Execute the following command:

>   ```

Author: Added the fix.

  openssl enc -aes-256-cbc -salt -in /opt/.secrets/common_os_pwdfile -out /opt/.secrets/common_os_pwdfile.enc -pass file:/opt/.secrets/pwd.key
  rm -f /opt/.secrets/common_os_pwdfile
  chmod 400 /opt/.secrets/common_os_pwdfile.enc
  chmod 400 /opt/.secrets/pwd.key
  ```

### Notes

> * If you want to specify different passwords for all the accounts, create 3 different files and encrypt them under /opt/.secrets and pass the file name to the container using the env variable. Env variables can be ORACLE_PWD_FILE for oracle user, GRID_PWD_FILE for grid user, and DB_PWD_FILE for the database password.

Author: Added the fix.

> * if you want a common password oracle, grid, and db user, you can assign a password file name to COMMON_OS_PWD_FILE env variable.

Author: Added the fix.

> * Once the RAC enviornment setup completed, user must change Oracle/Grid and DB passwords based on his enviornment.

Author: Added the fix.

### Deploying Oracle RAC on Container With Block Devices:

If you are using an NFS volume, skip to the section "Deploying Oracle RAC on Container with NFS Volume".

Make sure the ASM devices do not have any existing file system. To clear any other file system from the devices, use the following command:

>   ```

Author: Added the fix.

  # dd if=/dev/zero of=/dev/xvde  bs=8k count=100000
  ```

Repeat for each shared block device. In the preceding example, `/dev/xvde` is a shared Xen virtual block device.

Now create the Oracle RAC container using the image. For the details of environment variables, refer to section 5. You can use the following example to create a container:

>   ```

Author: Added the fix.

    --hostname racnode1 \
    --volume /boot:/boot:ro \
    --volume /dev/shm \
    --tmpfs /dev/shm:rw,exec,size=4G \
    --volume /opt/containers/rac_host_file:/etc/hosts  \
    --volume /opt/.secrets:/run/secrets:ro \
    --dns=172.16.1.25 \
    --dns-search=example.com \
    --device=/dev/xvde:/dev/asm_disk1  \
    --device=/dev/xvdf:/dev/asm_disk2 \
    --privileged=false  \
    --cap-add=SYS_NICE \
    --cap-add=SYS_RESOURCE \
    --cap-add=NET_ADMIN \
    -e DNS_SERVERS="172.16.1.25" \
    -e NODE_VIP=172.16.1.160 \
    -e VIP_HOSTNAME=racnode1-vip  \
    -e PRIV_IP=192.168.17.150 \
    -e PRIV_HOSTNAME=racnode1-priv \
    -e PUBLIC_IP=172.16.1.150 \
    -e PUBLIC_HOSTNAME=racnode1  \
    -e SCAN_NAME=racnode-scan \
    -e OP_TYPE=INSTALL \
    -e DOMAIN=example.com \
    -e ASM_DEVICE_LIST=/dev/asm_disk1,/dev/asm_disk2 \
    -e ASM_DISCOVERY_DIR=/dev \
    -e CMAN_HOSTNAME=racnode-cman1 \
    -e CMAN_IP=172.16.1.15 \
    -e COMMON_OS_PWD_FILE=common_os_pwdfile.enc \
    -e PWD_KEY=pwd.key \
    --restart=always --tmpfs=/run -v /sys/fs/cgroup:/sys/fs/cgroup:ro \
    --cpu-rt-runtime=95000 --ulimit rtprio=99  \
    --name racnode1 \
    oracle/database-rac:21.3.0
  ```

> **Note:** Change environment variables such as IPs, ASM_DEVICE_LIST, PWD_FILE, and PWD_KEY based on your env. Also, change the devices based on your env.

Author: Added the fix.

### Deploying Oracle RAC on Container  With Oralce RAC Storage Container

Now create the Oracle RAC container using the image. For the details of environment variables, refer to section 6. You can use the following example to create a container:

>   ```

Author: Added the fix.

    --tmpfs /dev/shm:rw,exec,size=4G \
    --volume /opt/containers/rac_host_file:/etc/hosts  \
    --volume /opt/.secrets:/run/secrets:ro \
    --dns=172.16.1.25 \
    --dns-search=example.com \
    --privileged=false \
    --volume racstorage:/oradata \
    --cap-add=SYS_NICE \
    --cap-add=SYS_RESOURCE \
    --cap-add=NET_ADMIN \
    -e DNS_SERVERS="172.16.1.25" \
    -e NODE_VIP=172.16.1.160  \
    -e VIP_HOSTNAME=racnode1-vip  \
    -e PRIV_IP=192.168.17.150  \
    -e PRIV_HOSTNAME=racnode1-priv \
    -e PUBLIC_IP=172.16.1.150 \
    -e PUBLIC_HOSTNAME=racnode1  \
    -e SCAN_NAME=racnode-scan \
    -e OP_TYPE=INSTALL \
    -e DOMAIN=example.com \
    -e ASM_DISCOVERY_DIR=/oradata \
    -e ASM_DEVICE_LIST=/oradata/asm_disk01.img,/oradata/asm_disk02.img,/oradata/asm_disk03.img,/oradata/asm_disk04.img,/oradata/asm_disk05.img  \
    -e CMAN_HOSTNAME=racnode-cman1 \
    -e CMAN_IP=172.16.1.15 \
    -e COMMON_OS_PWD_FILE=common_os_pwdfile.enc \
    -e PWD_KEY=pwd.key \
    --restart=always \
    --tmpfs=/run -v /sys/fs/cgroup:/sys/fs/cgroup:ro \
    --cpu-rt-runtime=95000 \
    --ulimit rtprio=99  \
    --name racnode1 \
    oracle/database-rac:21.3.0
  ```

**Notes:**

> * Change environment variables such as IPs, ASM_DEVICE_LIST, PWD_FILE, and PWD_KEY based on your env. Also, change the devices based on your env.

Author: Added the fix.

* You must have created the `racstorage` volume before the creation of the Oracle RAC Container. For details about the env variables, refer the section 6.

### Assign networks to Oracle RAC containers

You need to assign the Docker networks created in section 1 to containers.Eexecute the following commands:

>   ```

Author: Added the fix.

  # docker network disconnect bridge racnode1
  # docker network connect rac_pub1_nw --ip 172.16.1.150 racnode1
  # docker network connect rac_priv1_nw --ip 192.168.17.150  racnode1
  ```

### Start the first container

> You need to start the container.Execute the following command:

Author: Added the fix.

>   ```

Author: Added the fix.

  # docker start racnode1
  ```

It can take at least 40 minutes or longer to create the first node of the cluster. To check the logs, use the following command from another terminal session:

>   ```

Author: Added the fix.

  # docker logs -f racnode1
  ```

You should see the database creation success message at the end:

  ```
  ####################################
  ORACLE RAC DATABASE IS READY TO USE!
  ####################################
  ```
### Connect to the Oracle RAC container
To connect to the container execute the following command:

> ```

Author: Added the fix.

# docker exec -i -t racnode1 /bin/bash
```

If the install fails for any reason, log in to the container using the preceding command and check `/tmp/orod.log`. You can also review the Grid Infrastructure logs located at `$GRID_BASE/diag/crs` and check for failure logs. If the failure occurred during the database creation then check the database logs.

## Section 4: Adding a Oracle RAC Node using a container

Before proceeding to the next step, ensure Oracle Grid Infrastructure is running and the Oracle RAC Database is open as per instructions in section 3. Otherwise, the node addition process will fail.

### Password management
Specify the secret volume for resetting grid/oracle and database passwords during node creation or node addition. It can be shared volume among all the containers

> ```

Author: Added the fix.

mkdir /opt/.secrets/
openssl rand -hex 64 -out /opt/.secrets/pwd.key
```

Edit the `/opt/.secrets/common_os_pwdfile` and seed the password for grid/oracle and database. It will be a common password for grid/oracle and database user. Execute the following command:

> ```

Author: Added the fix.

openssl enc -aes-256-cbc -salt -in /opt/.secrets/common_os_pwdfile -out /opt/.secrets/common_os_pwdfile.enc -pass file:/opt/.secrets/pwd.key
rm -f /opt/.secrets/common_os_pwdfile
```

### Notes

> * If you want to specify the different password for all the accounts, create 3 different files and encrypt them under /opt/.secrets and pass the file name to the container using the env variable. Env variables can be ORACLE_PWD_FILE for oracle user, GRID_PWD_FILE for grid user and DB_PWD_FILE for the database password.

Author: Added the fix.

> * if you want a common password oracle, grid, and db user, you can assign a password file name to COMMON_OS_PWD_FILE env variable.

Author: Added the fix.

Reset the password on the existing Oracle RAC node for SSH setup between an existing node in the cluster and the new node. Password must be the same on all the nodes for grid and oracle users. Execute the following command on an existing node of the cluster.

```
docker exec -i -t -u root racnode1 /bin/bash
sh  /opt/scripts/startup/resetOSPassword.sh --help
sh /opt/scripts/startup/resetOSPassword.sh --op_type reset_grid_oracle --pwd_file common_os_pwdfile.enc --secret_volume /run/secrets --pwd_key_file pwd.key
```

> **Note:** If you do not have a common secret volume among Oracle RAC containers, populate the password file with the same password that you have used on the new node, encrypt the file, and execute resetOSPassword.sh on the exiting node of the cluster.

Author: Yes, it must be existing. Thanks for catching it.

```
# docker exec -i -t racnode2 /bin/bash
```

If the node addition fails, log in to the container using the preceding command and review `/tmp/orod.log`. You can also review the Grid Infrastructure logs i.e. `$GRID_BASE/diag/crs` and check for failure logs. If the node creation has failed during the database creation process, then check DB logs.

## Section 5: Connecting to Oracle RAC Database

**IMPORTANT:** This section assumes that you have successfully created an Oracle RAC environment.

If you are using connection manager and exposed port 1521 on the host, connect from an external client using the following connection string:

```
system/<password>@//<docker_host>:1521/<ORACLE_SID>
```

If you are using the Docker MACVLAN driver and you have configured DNS appropriately, you can connect using the public scan listener directly from any external client using the following connection string:

```
system/<password>@//<scan_name>:1521/<ORACLE_SID>
```

## Section 6: Environment Variables for the first node

**IMPORTANT:** This section provides details about the environment variables that can be used when creating the first node of a cluster.

Parameters:

> ```
> OP_TYPE=###Specify the Operation TYPE. It can accept 2 values INSTALL OR ADDNODE####
> 
> NODE_VIP=####Specify the Node VIP###
> 
> VIP_HOSTNAME=###Specify the VIP hostname###
> 
> PRIV_IP=###Specify the Private IP###
> 
> PRIV_HOSTNAME=###Specify the Private Hostname###
> 
> PUBLIC_IP=###Specify the public IP###
> 
> PUBLIC_HOSTNAME=###Specify the public hostname###
> 
> SCAN_NAME=###Specify the scan name###
> 
> ASM_DEVICE_LIST=###Specify the ASM Disk lists.
> 
> SCAN_IP=###Specify this if you do not have DNS server###
> 
> DOMAIN=###Default value set to example.com###
> 
> PASSWORD=###OS password will be generated by openssl###
> 
> CLUSTER_NAME=###Default value set to racnode-c####
> 
> ORACLE_SID=###Default value set to ORCLCDB###
> 
> ORACLE_PDB=###Default value set to ORCLPDB###
> 
> ORACLE_PWD=###Default value set to generated by openssl random password###
> 
> ORACLE_CHARACTERSET=###Default value set AL32UTF8###
> 
> DEFAULT_GATEWAY=###Default gateway. You need this env variable if containers
> will be running on multiple hosts.####
> 
> CMAN_HOSTNAME=###Connection Manager Host Name###
> 
> CMAN_IP=###Connection manager Host IP###
> 
> ASM_DISCOVERY_DIR=####ASM disk location insdie the container. By default it is /dev######
> 
> COMMON_OS_PWD_FILE=###Pass the file name to setup grid and oracle user password. If you specify ORACLE_PWD_FILE, GRID_PWD_FILE and DB_PWD_FILE then you do not need to specify this env variable###
> 
> ORACLE_PWD_FILE=###Pass the file name to set the password for oracle user.###
> 
> GRID_PWD_FILE=###Pass the file name to set the password for grid user.###
> 
> DB_PWD_FILE=###Pass the file name to set the password for DB user i.e. sys.###
> 
> REMOVE_OS_PWD_FILES=###Set this env variable to true to remove pwd key file and password file after resetting the password.###
> 
> CONTAINER_DB_FLAG=###Default value is set to true to create container database. Set this to false if you do not want to create a container database.###
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```bash
OP_TYPE="[INSTALL|ADDNODE]"   # Specify the Operation TYPE. Valid values are INSTALL OR ADDNODE
NODE_VIP="1.2.3.4"  # Specify the Node VIP
VIP_HOSTNAME="vip.host.name"  # Specify the VIP hostname
PRIV_IP="1.2.3.4"  # Specify the Private IP
PRIV_HOSTNAME="priv.host.name"  # Specify the Private Hostname
PUBLIC_IP="1.2.3.4"  # Specify the public IP
PUBLIC_HOSTNAME="pub.host.name"  # Specify the public hostname
SCAN_NAME="scan.name"  # Specify the scan name
ASM_DEVICE_LIST=""  # Specify the ASM Disk lists.
SCAN_IP=""  # Specify this if you do not have DNS server
DOMAIN="example.com"  # Default value set to example.com
PASSWORD=""  # OS password will be generated by openssl
CLUSTER_NAME=""  # Default value set to racnode-c
ORACLE_SID=""  # Default value set to ORCLCDB
ORACLE_PDB=""  # Default value set to ORCLPDB
ORACLE_PWD=""  # Default value set to generated by openssl random password
ORACLE_CHARACTERSET="AL32UTF8"  # Default value
DEFAULT_GATEWAY=""  # Default gateway. You need this env variable if containers will be running on multiple hosts.
CMAN_HOSTNAME=""  # Connection Manager Host Name
CMAN_IP=""  # Connection manager Host IP
ASM_DISCOVERY_DIR=""  # ASM disk location insdie the container. By default it is /dev
COMMON_OS_PWD_FILE=""  # Pass the file name to setup grid and oracle user password. If you specify ORACLE_PWD_FILE, GRID_PWD_FILE and DB_PWD_FILE then you do not need to specify this env variable
ORACLE_PWD_FILE=""  # Pass the file name to set the password for oracle user.
GRID_PWD_FILE=""  # Pass the file name to set the password for grid user.
DB_PWD_FILE=""  # Pass the file name to set the password for DB user i.e. sys.
REMOVE_OS_PWD_FILES="[true|false]"  # Set this env variable to true to remove pwd key file and password file after resetting the password.
CONTAINER_DB_FLAG="[true|false]"  # Default value is set to true to create container database. Set this to false if you do not want to create a container database.
```
````

Or replace my suggestion with the default values for each variable.

PUBLIC_HOSTNAME=###Specify the public hostname###

SCAN_NAME=###Specify the scan name###

SCAN_IP=###Specify this if you do not have DNS server###

ASM_DEVICE_LIST=###Specify the ASM Disk lists.

DOMAIN=###Default value set to example.com###

ORACLE_SID=###Default value set to ORCLCDB###

DEFAULT_GATEWAY=###Default gateway. You need this env variable if containers will be running on multiple hosts.####

CMAN_HOSTNAME=###Connection Manager Host Name###

CMAN_IP=###Connection manager Host IP###

ASM_DISCOVERY_DIR=####ASM disk location insdie the container. By default it is /dev######

COMMON_OS_PWD_FILE=###You need to pass the file name to setup grid and oracle user password. If you specify ORACLE_PWD_FILE, GRID_PWD_FILE and DB_PWD_FILE then you do not need to specify this env variable###

ORACLE_PWD_FILE=###You need to pass the file name to set the password for oracle user.###

GRID_PWD_FILE=###You need to pass the file name to set the password for grid user.###

DB_PWD_FILE=###You need to pass the file name to set the password for DB user i.e. sys.###

REMOVE_OS_PWD_FILES=###You need to set this to true to remove pwd key file and password file after resetting password.###

> ```

Reviewer: This should be cleaned up like the previous list

 * Oracle Database 12c Release 2 Oracle Grid Infrastructure (12.2.0.1.0) for Linux x86-64
 * Oracle Database 12c Release 2 (12.2.0.1.0) Enterprise Edition for Linux x86-64
  
 **Notes:** 
 * Note that the Oracle RAC on Docker Container releases are supported only for test and development environments, but not for production environments.
 * If you are planning to build and deploy Oracle RAC 18.3.0, you need to download Oracle 18.3.0 Grid Infrastructure and Oracle Database 18.3.0 Database. You also need to download Patch# p28322130_183000OCWRU_Linux-x86-64.zip from [Oracle Technology Network](https://www.oracle.com/technetwork/database/database-technologies/clusterware/downloads/docker-4418413.html). Stage it under dockerfiles/18.3.0 folder.
 * If you are planning to build and deploy Oracle RAC 12.2.0.1, you need to download Oracle 12.2.0.1 Grid Infrastructure and Oracle Database 12.2.0.1 Database. You also need to download Patch# p27383741_122010_Linux-x86-64.zip from [Oracle Technology Network](https://www.oracle.com/technetwork/database/database-technologies/clusterware/downloads/docker-4418413.html). Stage it under dockerfiles/12.2.0.1 folder.
  
## Section 9 : Support

> At the time of this release, Oracle RAC is supported for Oracle Linux 7. To see current Linux support certifications, see:

Reviewer: You're missing a URL here.

## Section 10 : License

To download and run Oracle Grid and Database, regardless of whether inside or outside a container, you must download the binaries from the Oracle website and accept the license indicated on that page.

> All scripts and files hosted in this project and GitHub docker-images/OracleDatabase repository required to build the container  images are unless otherwise noted, released under UPL 1.0 license.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All scripts and files hosted in this repository which are required to build the container  images are, unless otherwise noted, released under UPL 1.0 license.
```
